I bow to all the Sahaja Yogis, and all the
seekers of truth, may God bless you all.
Is such a great thing to be back home with
all of you and to see you here blooming with
joy and happiness.
That's the fate of a Mother who has so many
children, that she goes from places to places
leaving some children behind but looking forward
to meeting others.
Somehow that compensates for the separation.
Today I think we should start on a very subtler
ideas about Sahaja Yoga, because you people
have understood it on the other plane of mechanism
that works it out, the Kundalini, the chakras
and all those things.
But we have to see what is the problem that
faces actually human beings and why we make
such mistakes in our seeking.
Is a very important thing to understand, because
unless and until we understand why we really
make mistakes or others make mistakes we can
never forgive them, and we might have a kind
of a high handed attitude towards others who
are now coming to Sahaja Yoga, thinking that,
why did they do like that, and why did they
commit this mistake and they could have done
better.
But I personally think that if you look at
yourself you will know that you also committed
mistakes.
Everybody has committed mistakes.
Some have committed more mistakes, and some
have committed less.
But what is the reason why human being has
been committing mistake?
That's what we should look into it.
The first and foremost thing is without getting
-
(Shri Mataji speaks aside: Come along here
you can sit there is a lot of space here,
come along.
Move out, move out you can sit in the center,
come along, come along, come along not to
feel shy there's lot of space in here.
I think you'll have to have a bigger hall
now Matha?
Yes come along, come there's room here you
can sit down here, come along.
So sweet of you.
Thank you very much, so very kind of you thank
you, thank you.
Please make yourself comfortable come along.
So how are you?
Congratulations and God Bless.
Are you all right there all of you?)
Now those who have got Realization and those
who have felt the cool breeze and have matured
in Sahaja Yoga know that automatically you
drop out many things, automatically.
Now why do we do it, you see, why do we drop
things?
Even I don't ask you for it, you just drop
them, why?
The reason is the light of the Spirit within
ourselves empowers us to see that this is
wrong.
Like as we have got eyes, once we have eyes
we know whether we are going to fall here,
or we are going to slip, or what's going to
happen.
In the same way, when you get this vibratory
awareness it is not an awareness only of the
fingers, is the awareness of the whole being
and you just drop out everything that is against
your Spirit.
I don't have to tell you.
But without Self-Realization what happens
that reality is just a myth.
It's only a mental projection with which you
live.
You project your mind and you think this is
reality.
You can call anything as reality.
Any hallucination can be a reality, any theory
can be a reality, any absurd ideas could be
a reality.
I mean all religions have taken that form
now, it's very sad.
But all religions, which came from truth and
from reality, are nothing but mental projections,
and they're very far away from reality.
You can only feel, understand and assimilate
reality if you are a self-realized person.
Unless and until this Self has expressed itself
or manifested within yourself, the light has
come into you, how are you to manage?
Whatever you try is a mental projection.
Like many people who came first, "Oh, we believe
that we are born again."
All right, now how can you challenge it, if
you believe into something?
"I believe" is the one of the great sentences
we use.
But what is that I that believes?
That's that ego.
That's not your Self, because you have not
yet felt the Self.
So to feel the Self is the most important
thing if you have to know the reality.
So you must excuse all others who have not
felt the Self, who have their own mental projections.
They might look like fanatic; they might look
like stupid people.
They may look like to be very high handed
or maybe you might think they are these ego
orientated pseudo-intellectuals and all sorts
of things.
But all that is mythical because that plane
on which they move is mythical itself.
Whatever you know through your mental projection
is imagination itself.
But Spirit is the reality, and to know the
reality you have to be the Spirit.
And once the Spirit starts shining within
you, you just drop everything like hot brick.
Like I would say, as I've many times told
you, that in our human awareness we know what
is beauty is, we know what cleanliness is.
For a dog he doesn't understand cleanliness.
If you don't give him a bath he'll be quite
happy, actually to give him a bath is a problem.
But to a human being, you see, what is a sin
or what is wrong?
Sin is nothing but whatever is against the
Spirit, is sin.
Even fear is a sin.
Any such small little sins or the big sins,
all are nothing, but they are all against
the Spirit.
But if you have not felt the Spirit whatever
you do will amount to something like anti-Spirit,
because you don't know what you are doing.
Now the prophets have tried their level best
to tell you that you must keep your balance,
you have to follow a certain religion as they
call it, or as we call it dharma within yourself.
But that to for what?
Why to have the balance within you?
People will always say, "What's wrong?"
"What's wrong if we are not in balance, what's
there?
What's wrong in drinking?"
I never said don't drink before Realization.
After Realization you yourself drop out.
But they say, "What's wrong, why does he tell
us like this?
Why should we listen to them?"
Why the balance?
The balance is needed for the ascent.
Unless and until you have a balance how will
you ascend?
Imagine an aeroplane without any balance.
Say a wing is missing, will it be able to
take off from the ground, cannot.
So for the ascent it is necessary to have
the necessary balance.
So they said, "Keep in the balance."
But even when we're just told simple thing
to keep to the central path, to lead a life
of balancing yourself or moderation in your
life, in that also the moderation part of
it they have made it an extreme.
Everything has been made into an extreme,
because religion also they want to follow
through their mental conception.
That's why you find all these religions is
a mess.
But I would not blame them for that because
they had no other instrument to go ahead,
and they wanted to go ahead.
They had no other way to proceed further so
they used only one engine they had was this
mental projection.
And they made all these various projections
and that's how they are so diversified and
separated from each other.
But as soon as your Spirit shines, then, everything
drops out by itself because it is beyond mind.
Spirit is beyond mind, I don't have to tell
you anything that you must have balance, you
develop a balance.
If you don't have a balance you'll just get
vibrations in one hand, other hand will be
just cold or will be hot, so you start giving
your balance.
But I don't say that give a balance means
following a particular religion or anything
because if I say that half of you may run
away.
The beauty of Self-Realization lies in secretly
working out within you, everything that is
virtuous, that is beautiful, that is joyful,
secretly, it doesn't tell you.
For example now supposing somebody has an
imbalance on the right hand side.
Very intellectual fellow, and thinking for
the future and futuristic man you see, forgetting
all his past.
Even there are people I've known they have
forgotten their names, and the names of their
wives.
But they are so futuristic.
For such a person if you tell them don't think
about the future, he can't do it because he's
put his attention like this.
The whole ego portion has gone that side and
he's all looking forward to the future.
But if you put him somehow or other, in a
state where his Self-Realization takes place
then immediately he will say, "Mother, my
right hand is burning and there's nothing
in the left hand."
So you start talking on a very mundane way,
not in a very subtle manner like all the philosophers
talk.
All right that means your right is not getting
proper vibrations, so you raise your left
to the right?
Now for an intellectual he can't understand,
"What is this raising left to the right.
I have read Bhagavad-Gita, I have read Bible,
I've done Koran, I have done this, nowhere
written left to the right.
What do you mean by this kind of a nonsense,
you see that you have to put your hand just
left to the right and you get the balance?"
I cannot appeal to a mind which has been thinking
about God, religion, everything, all right.
So the secretive working of the Kundalini
is such, that She goes in that portion where
you need help.
She works it out and She raises you and gradually
She transforms you.
But if it is not awakened, if it has not yet
touched the Sahasrara, means if it has not
touched the feet of your Spirit, it may not
be interested, it may not be interested.
So the first and foremost thing is to raise
the Kundalini, and to let Her at least once
know that She has touched the Spirit.
Then She has interest, otherwise She hasn't
got any interest.
That's why you must have seen some people
who come to Sahaja Yoga and just drop out.
The reason is the Kundalini Itself is not
interested.
So the foremost duty of every Sahaja Yogi
is, first of all, not to be angry or annoyed
with people who have done lots of wrong.
But be very kind to them and gentle because
they are just seekers of truth.
How can you be angry with them?
Already we have lost so many of them because
of their stupidity.
But we must try to salvage as many as possible.
And then the second duty of every Sahaja Yogi
is to slowly steadily to convince the person
that he should become the Spirit.
Of course you'll meet so many who will be
self-appointed people they'll say, "Oh, I've
already met the Spirit, I am the Spirit.
I'm Christ."
They can say anything, so soothe them down
a little, bring them down and raise their
Kundalini, but don't leave it half way, must
touch the Sahasrara.
I have seen some of the Sahaja Yogis, even
in India I've seen, they just give up.
They'll sit down, "Oh Mother forget it, we
don't want to do it, it's like a mountain
we can't raise it."
But we have to work, that's what we have to
do is to work it out.
Raise the Kundalini, pierce through the Sahasrara,
and then Kundalini will work it out.
It was a question asked to Me, "Mother that
we gave Realization to so many people, out
of that only about thirty percent people are
coming up the rest are lost."
The reason is you have left it half done.
So this is one of the reasons why we have
lost some people and there is no connection
still established.
Now those people who come to Sahaja Yoga you
have to really work hard on them.
Instead of arguing with them, because what
will you argue is all mental projection.
On what point are you going to argue with
them because that is not going to give them
the light of the Spirit.
So somehow or other work it out in such a
way that they feel light of the Spirit, then
talk.
But we think that if we talk to them it will
help.
It's not question of conviction, is the question
of happening, is question of becoming, which
is important.
Unless and until they become, what is the
use of argument, there's no law court here.
There is no debate going on, there is no election.
There's nothing of the kind, it is something
that has to happen to all those people that
they should get their light of their Spirit.
And once they get it, then it is very much
easier for you to talk to them and tell them
about it.
The
philosophy of Sahaja Yoga is extremely simple.
Is the simplest of all philosophy you can
think of.
Is a very simple philosophy, is that, once
you get your Realization you start feeling
for the first time, the All Pervading Power
and forget everything else.
Once you get that feeling of the All Pervading
Power only you have know how to maneuver it,
how to work it out and how to use it for your
own growth.
It is made easy, it has to be as it is the
most vital force that has to take place in
the realm of spirituality.
Now thank God, many gurus are exposed.
Thank God many myths that were working out
are being now blasted.
When I was telling you people about the promiscuousness
and all those things, that this will never
lead you to God but to hell, I remember when
people criticized Me to be Victorian.
I mean people have ideas, which is a very
Victorian ideas, and also saying that Mother
is very matronly and all sorts of English
language you see, that they could use about
Me.
But now you see, what have recently I've told,
thank God there have been a film showing the
diseases we get by promiscuous life.
The right sane attitude towards life definitely
helps you very much.
But thank God, the grace of God is so great
that once you get Realization you become such
a different person that everything drops out.
You are really a transformed personality and
so that one should know whatever was the past
is finished now, is no more there.
The egg is finished, is the bird.
And whom to blame, whom to talk about is the
bird there, now let the bird find its own
wings and fly.
Once you understand this simple thing of Sahaja
Yoga is that we have to make every one feel
the All Pervading Power of God, to begin with.
Unless and until they have felt it we have
not to accept them as realized souls.
They have to feel it.
Now of course as you know if the Vishuddhi
chakra is not all right they may not feel
it in the hands.
But still no use if you tell them that according
to us you are a realized soul but according
to you, you are not feeling.
You see because the mind is working.
Instead of feeling a little disturbed about
it, upset about it, they may just think that,
you see, it's just a make believe or a psychological
stuff and I didn't feel it, I'm a person of
great will power, that attitude, yes, many
feel like that.
So they can be lost.
For now as our Sahaja Yoga is increasing everywhere
in the world, we have so many good Sahaja
Yogis in England now.
They are sensible people and uniquely placed
in this great country.
And they have to understand that wisdom is
higher than intellect, and discretion is higher
than debating.
Take a very kindly and a compassionate attitude
towards the rest of the people, and then work
it out that they should somehow or other,
feel this subtle force of God's love.
Then gradually try to bring them round and
teach them what you've got.
Is easy to blame their ego, it's very easy,
to say, "Oh, they're ego orientated, throw
them away," very easy to say that.
But that's not their mistake.
That's not their doing.
It was because they never felt the Spirit
before.
Whatever they have they have used that instrument
whether ego or super ego and they have built
up their own self, in that kind of a fort.
But this barrier can be broken very easily
as soon as they get their Realization.
I found the same thing in Australia.
When I went there so many came back, so many.
And now we have everywhere quite a lot of
people.
In every ashram now we have coming at least
thousand to two thousand people.
We have five centers now and it's working
out very well.
Same thing is in England, we can work it out.
But I told them the same thing that reality
is a different thing, and a mental projection
is a different thing.
You still do not talk on that level to these
people.
Because you just increase their mental projection
and their barriers within them and this has
helped them a lot.
And you'll be amazed that those people who
were lost have come back to Sahaja Yoga and
are growing very fast within themselves.
Now for the new people I have to tell, you
have to have patience with yourself.
You have to have patience.
As I have patience for you, I have love for
you, I am here only because of you.
You also must have patience for yourself and
full confidence in yourself that you'll become
the Spirit.
If you have these two things, I'm sure it
will work out.
It is going to work out.
Once you get your Realization you have to
work out on other people, and gradually you
will be amazed that it will grow, and it will
convince you, and you will know that you have
become the realized soul.
But the realized souls are very simple people.
If they say, "I am a realized soul," nobody
can believe them because there are no horns
around them.
No gurudom around them, nothing of the kind,
they're extremely simple people.
So what is going to help you is a simple attitude
toward yourself and toward these Sahaja Yogis,
and towards Sahaja Yoga that you have come
here to become the Spirit.
We have to gain nothing from you.
There's no clientele as such, there's no money
proposition, nothing.
It is you who have come to the Ganges, to
take the holy water, it is you who has to
take it.
We are here to help you.
If that attitude is developed I'm sure, with
your co-operation, we can change the face
of this world.
And as William Blake has said in this Hampstead,
"We have to build up Jerusalem here."
May God Bless you all.
Any questions you have you ask?
(Shri Mataji speaks aside: This is not a loud
speaker.
I think I better present you with a loud speaker.
What happened, you presented one to India
why don't you get one.
Further conversation about the speaker)
Any questions to request Me?
Seeker asks a question: - How can one who
is new this subject distinguish between what
is psychic phenomena and what is actually
the manifestation of the Spirit itself?
[Seeker gives a long introduction to this
question which is unclear.]
Shri Mataji: is good idea.
May God bless you.
You see when they say they have felt the cool
breeze the psychic people they are telling
lies, simple as that.
Because the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost,
that you feel, has not only the cool breeze
it has its own powers.
For example, now I say there is a flame here,
all right.
Now if there is a blind man also if he puts
his finger round there he will know it's a
flame isn't it, because he can feel the heat.
In the same way this cool breeze is just to
feel this cool breeze but is a dynamic stuff.
You can, when you get this cool breeze established
within yourself, you'll be amazed that under
your hand the Kundalini will pulsate, it will
rise, and you will feel the cool breeze of
another person.
With this cool breeze you can cure diseases
like cancer and many other.
With this cool breeze you can give balances
to people.
Everything you can do with this cool breeze,
is tremendous.
If you have any, say question, any question,
supposing you are a realized soul, you want
to know about a guru if he is real or not.
If it's a psychic thing you won't get anything.
You won't know why psychic people are all
going to parapsychology, is all wrong, it's
a horrible stuff.
This parapsychology is one of the worst things
that can happen to a human being, but they
don't know what it is.
There's nothing absolute about it.
But the cool breeze is the one that gives
you complete absolute idea.
Like you want to know is there God?
Ask a simple question like that, "Mother is
there God?"
You'll get a cool breeze.
Now it's so, discrimination is so great and
so precise that supposing you want to know
about a guru how he is, supposing he's a devil
then you might get even blisters on your hand.
You might even get tremendous heat in your
hand and vibrations will stop completely.
But supposing he's half way then you may not
get such bad effects but there won't be any
breeze at all.
But supposing he's a realized soul, for William
Blake for example, I don't have to ask I know,
but unless and until you really feel that
cool breeze in your hand in a real way, also
it's coming out of your head then you should
not believe that you have got a Realization,
you should not believe into it.
Now they are many psychic cases I know who
told Me, "We have always felt the cool breeze,"
because they cannot accept it, just say, and
their Kundalini just frozen there.
Nothing of the kind, I'm getting terrible
heat and just praying if this person goes
away for a while will be good rest for Me.
And he says, "No, no but I have felt the cool
breeze."
All the time he's telling Me lies.
"I have always felt the cool breeze everywhere."
But the Kundalini is down below you can feel
it yourself, you can see for yourself.
If the Kundalini is not here how are you feeling
the cool breeze?
You cannot.
Is a phenomena as a result of something it's
not just a phenomena of the cool breeze.
But when the Kundalini rises above the Sahasrara
then only you can feel the cool breeze.
I've seen many people like that.
They don't want to accept, oh that I've got
all this.
But supposing there are people who are born
realized.
There are people, some people who feel the
cool breeze.
Now you have to differentiate between them
and the unreal people.
There can be some people who are born realized.
But nowadays we have decided not to tell them
that they are born realized because, those
who came to us we told them they're born realized,
their ego suddenly inflated like this.
You see absolutely gone cases and we lost
them.
Because you see, if you are a born realized
it's nothing great, nothing great, because
so many are realized.
Supposing you get Realization today all right,
so you'll be a realized soul, but you're not
a Sahaja Yogi.
Sahaja Yogi is a person who not only is a
realized soul but he knows all the technique
of this pure knowledge.
He knows all the laws of the Divine happening
and also he knows how to handle the Kundalini.
Sahaja Yogi is a knowledgeable person the
one who knows all about it.
Who knows all the permutations and combinations,
who knows how to maneuver it and everything
about it.
So he's you can say a boy who enters into
the first class.
He just knows one plus one is two.
But say a professor of mathematics, there's
a big difference between the two.
So even if somebody's a born realized it's
better not to tell him that you are born realized
because he suddenly thinks he has become a
professor.
Imagine a little boy thinking that he's become
a professor.
It is very detrimental to him as well as to
others.
So best thing is to get the cool breeze in
the right sense, in the right way and understand
that it works, it must work.
As you see how do you make out a real note
and an unreal note?
The real note it works.
So it's not a myth it's a reality, again I
say it's a reality.
Supposing this is an artificial thing it won't
work.
Anything that is artificial doesn't work,
all right?
You go to this Madame Tussaud's place and
you'll find so many people sitting looking
exactly like us you see, but they are not
living, all right, you understand My point?
So you have to master it, know it fully.
You have to master it and understand it.
You see unless and until you understand it
to that extent, you cannot reach any conclusion,
all right, and we have to work it out.
May God Bless you.
Is not only thing that is cool breeze, where
is your Kundalini, whether it has risen or
not, if the cool breeze is coming out of the
head.
Only a Sahaja Yogi can say, nobody can say
that.
I've seen many people who get even the cool
breeze coming out of their head they cannot
feel it because their hands are not sensitive.
Only a Sahaja Yogi can say, is true.
But that doesn't mean that a Sahaja Yogi is
something out of the blue, is just like you.
Only thing is he has grown into a new awareness,
which you are going to grow yourself.
(UNCLEAR- Mother speaks to seeker)
In Sahaja Yoga there are so many ways and
methods how we work out all the help from
all the elements, how we work it.
For example, this gentleman say for example,
I find his left side is overloaded.
You can ask the Mother Earth to take away
the problem.
Just put left hand towards Me and right hand
on the Mother Earth, you can get cured, you
will feel better.
Feeling better now?
Just wait, have patience.
It will work.
Any other question?
You must see that the person is transformed.
They may say anything the person must be transformed.
He must become a saint.
And the saint is not a person who calls himself
a saint, but a saintly person is that one
who drops out all nonsensical things, automatically.
Nothing sticks to it.
As they say, "The lotus leaf you see, if you
put water on the lotus leaf the water drops
out, nothing sticks to it."
I think in England at least seventy percent
or maybe say sixty percent people have been
drug addicts, Sahaja Yogis, you can't believe
they were.
If not addicts they were something like that.
I used to call them drugists and chemists,
but they're different today.
Any other question please?
(Question- Is the artificial raising of the
Kundalini dangerous?)
Yes first.
You see the trouble is, those who have written
about it have no authority.
I have said about it many a times.
Like say a villager comes to the city and
puts his hand in the plug you see, and gets
a shock and says electricity is very dangerous,
all right, is like that.
But Kundalini is your Mother.
You have only one Mother and She has only
one son.
It's your individual Mother.
You don't share it even with your brother
or sister.
She's your Mother.
She doesn't trouble you at all.
She's your the greatest well wisher who's
born again and again with you waiting for
this time, there's no question.
But those who are unauthorized harm the Kundalinis
of thousands of people.
People have seen that.
Because you see that's My nature perhaps that
I can do it.
But then people feel very hurt you know they
can't understand why should Mother do it.
I said, "You better do it.
It's good I should retire, I'm sixty years
of age is better for Me to retire, you should
do it."
But if you are doing so many things, you know
I don't know how to drive, I don't know many
things that you do.
I know one thing, how to raise Kundalini.
So if something is difficult and is done easily
means that person is a master of that.
And if that person is a master doesn't matter
there are masters of everything, all right.
So far I haven't seen anybody suffering because
of Kundalini and should not.
But it's not an easy thing for many people
because I met some saints this time and they
said, "It's only You who can do it Mother
we can't."
There's a fellow called Gaugan (Not sure of
the name - SG) Maharaja, a very old man and
he lives in a forest on top of a hill and
he's come to Me also.
And he has many disciples and one of them
he told him to do this and do that you see,
the balancing part of it, and he did all those
things for fourteen years.
And suddenly in a program in Kolhapur he just
came to see Me, and got his Realization.
He was shocked that, "Fourteen years I've
been doing all this and I never got it and
how is it in a short time I got it?"
So he went to see Gaugan Maharaja so he told
him about Me.
He said, "She's different."
So that's how it is, and I feel rather embarrassed
to talk about it, all right?
May God Bless you.
(Question by seeker: -: How do you relate
Your experiences or what You are talking to
us about with traditional yogic practices?)
Very much so.
Very much, it is the most traditional thing,
you see.
Because the yogic practices you do here is
some sort of a, I don't know what to call
it, but it's like just a wee bit of it you've
have taken are doing that, that's not yogic
practice at all.
You see Patanjali Yoga, which was practiced
thousands of years back, when people led a
different type of life.
When the children went to school with the
gurus, who was a realized soul.
Nobody who was not a realized soul was called
a guru.
And the children had to lead a very celibate
life because according to your university,
you see, you're called as your gotras.
And you could not believe it today, say my
gotra is Shandilya.
Shandilya was the muni of My family.
I can't marry a man from the same gotra even
today.
Thousands of years have passed since then,
Shandilya lived about forty, fifty thousand
years back, but even today I can't marry a
man who belongs to
the same gotra.
So the celibacy you can imagine, that from
one university you could not marry.
That's how they lived a life and then they
went, after five years of age, they went to
those schools, they lived there and they came
out of that in complete celibate living they
were.
And then they got married and then when they
had children they sent them back, like that
the system was.
But if you read Patanjali Yoga the first thing
that Patanjali Yoga said that, "Ishwara Pranitana
(MAYBE Prathistana - SG)," means the establishment
of God.
First you must establish the Spirit.
It's like we have not yet started the car
for example, all right, it's very logical.
Now I'm coming to Hampstead, I don't know
the way, supposing, and I don't know which
way to go.
Now supposing I say that all right now I have
to go to Hampstead, from the very beginning
I'll turn to the left and not to the right,
can I do it, no?
So when the Kundalini rises then only you
will know which chakra is catching what is
your problem.
Beforehand supposing you are doing any, at
random, any exercises.
Say example, the way people are doing these
days yoga, so called, it has nothing to do
with yoga.
You see these exercises when you do, you are
not aware as to what are your problems.
You don't know what you are suffering from
and what particular asana is needed for a
particular type of a chakra, which is blocked,
all right.
So what you're doing is indiscriminate, taking
medicines without understanding.
But the practice of these things are a very
minimum part of the whole of Patanjali.
First is Ishwara Pranitana (MAYBE Prathistana
- SG) means when you establish the Spirit.
Ishwara Pranitana (MAYBE Prathistana - SG)
means the establishment of the God.
Once you have established that, then the Kundalini
starts moving and then you know where to stop,
where to turn, how to do.
This is real tradition, but the last fifty
years, you see, all sorts of nonsensical people
have come up.
They've changed this, changed that and is
logical, is logical you see.
Supposing you are suffering from Agnya chakra
all right, and you are doing the exercise
of this chakra you will spoil this as well
as spoil this.
There's no logic, there's no understanding,
nothing.
You see this is just physical exercises because
people want to become actors and actresses
I think.
(Seeker speaks to Mother.
Mentions the eight limbs of yoga the whole
astanga going through the nearma and the asanas,
prameara, pratchara to try to work toward
samadhi)
All those things you see, no, no it does not,
it does not, it does not.
That's the other way round you see, this is
the problem.
You see what happens that, unless and until
you get your Realization you have no entry
into yourself you don't know where you are
going.
This will never work out.
On the contrary, all those who have done Hatha
Yoga catch on their heart center very much,
because the whole attention is on the body.
Because the attention is on the body the left
heart catches.
Just now I have been to one organization where
I met three of them.
They all had their left side absolutely frozen,
so they said, "Mother what should we do?"
I said, "You must sing the praise of God.
Forget, you have become so dry like a bamboo
now, fill it up with the love of God."
Forget it all your asanas and everything,
just like, you see, dried fishes.
There's no emotions left.
It's such an imbalance, ha and tha both the
things, they've not said only ha, ha is the
surya nadi they said ha and tha.
What are you doing about tha, nothing?
So you are doing ha yoga, all right.
You have to do Hatha Yoga but, without Ishwara
Pranitana (MAYBE Prathistana - SG), without
Realization we also do, not that we don't
do, whatever is needed that we do.
For example, now when I went there I told
them what should be given to a person who
is suffering from mental diseases.
He said, "All this for mental diseases, also
all these for egoistical people, also all
these for liver patients, also all these for,
I mean it's horrible."
I said, "How can that be, on the contrary
to a mental patient if you make him bend forward
he'll suffer more, he must bend backwards.
A person who is ego oriented should bend forward."
They changed of course, I mean they're sensible
people as well as I'm concerned, they believe
in Me, they think in India of course I'm accepted
as some sort of a, something like that.
But you see these are little, little things
they don't know.
Supposing a person is ego oriented, right-sided
person as we call it.
Right-sided person if he tries to bend backwards
he'll become even worse.
And a person who is a superego person, suffering
from mental troubles and all that has to,
not to bend forward at all, he has to bend
backwards.
Because they're two types of people, there
are actually three types as you know.
The people who are, I mean, in vulgar language
we can call it masochist and sadist but they
are extreme cases, but I'm saying that style.
We call them tamo gunis and rajo gunis.
So the rajo gunis the sadists, if they become
more like this, God save the world, see the
point?
And the emotions are drained out of such people,
there no feelings left, no emotions, nothing,
zero.
I met one dentist who came and he said, "Mother
now I have become a sthitapragya."
I said, "How?"
"I have no feelings.
Nothing happens to me.
You see my child is sick I'm not bothered."
What a nice man you are.
"I have no feelings.
My mother calls me I have no feelings.
I am living somewhere alone."
I said, "All right."
I said, "Is that the way the saints have lived?
They have been worried not only about their
people but about everyone."
There's no love.
There's no love in the modern yoga, no love.
Is only the love of God, can be only felt
through Spirit.
You have to have a balance.
Is very one sided, extremely one sided.
One side is those who are singing the devotional
songs and the other side are (inaudible).
Both are equally mad I tell you.
Both can be equally mad.
Come to the balance, again you have to come
to the balance, otherwise you cannot enjoy
Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga is an enjoyment, enjoyment of
your balance, of the beauty of God's love,
and the truth of His work.
Everything has to be enjoyed, all right.
You just work it out.
Shri Mataji: Have you done yoga very much?
Seeker: Sorry?
Shri Mataji: Have you done lot of yoga?
Seeker: Reasonable.
I do follow the Buddhist practice which is
based upon...
Shri Mataji: Now Buddhist also!
Now I'll tell you about Buddhism, all right?
What are Buddhists doing?
Is true about everyone Christians, Hindus,
everybody.
Just because you asked about Buddhist I must
tell you.
Where is Buddha placed within us do they know?
Where is Buddha?
Buddha is placed within us at a point...
Seeker: Well, yes...
Shri Mataji: And what does He control within
us?
We have to know this knowledge of the roots.
Unless and until you know the knowledge of
the roots how will you know about the tree?
You cannot treat the tree on its leaves or
branches you have to go to the roots.
And first you find out the roots within.
Buddhism is so superficial now, that I Myself
amazed and Buddha must be thinking, oh God
from where it has come.
He says "Buddham, Sharanam, Gachami."
What is Buddha?
Is an enlightened soul?
Buddham means the one who is enlightened.
"Sangham sharanam gachami" means to the collective
being.
Sangham means the collective being.
"Dhamam sharanam gachami."
Dhamam is the balance within you.
How many Buddhists know about it?
They don't know even where Buddha is sitting
on their heads.
And what I find most of the Buddhists that
their center of Buddha is finished.
Buddha has disappeared from them once for
all.
He controls our ego, and he's settled down
here on the head on the left hand side.
We can prove it on Kundalini.
Supposing somebody is following Buddha immediately
people will know that you are a Buddhist because
there's a catch here.
And then some methods are there to awaken
Him, if you awaken Him your Kundalini will
rise otherwise it won't, all right?
So you must know the knowledge of the roots.
We should not just depend on Budhhism or any
"ism."
That's what I'm saying.
Seeker: Yes, it's just the thing You said
in the beginning, I mean I agree...
Shri Mataji: Yes, you see we have to have
the complete integrated knowledge of the roots,
which nourishes, isn't it?
Seeker ask the question:- Are you advocating
a system or a practice to get closer to these
roots?
Shri Mataji: No, no, no, no there is no system
about this.
There is no system no practice, no courses.
Actually it is spontaneous.
I'm talking of your evolution.
Your evolution comes through a living force
of the living God.
You cannot have a course in that, can you
have?
How do you sprout a seed?
You have to just put it in the Mother Earth
it sprouts by itself, is built in.
In the same way within you it's built in and
it sprouts, that's all.
There's no course.
Maybe you may not get it today you'll get
it tomorrow, some seeds sprout faster.
Seeker makes a comment: I see the Buddhist
tradition as growing out of a yogic insight.
No, no, no, you are sadly mistaken about Buddhism.
The trouble is with the western people they're
so fed up with Christianity that they think
Buddhism is going to solve the problem.
They are just like any other Christian church,
take it from Me.
All these lamas should be hanged by the nearest
tree, I tell you.
Horrible people they are, horrible.
You should see their vibrations.
You know this Dalai Lama when they're sitting
next to Me, I was invited to the Prime Minister's
place, I just couldn't bear him.
And the Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri
himself was a realized soul and he could feel
it and he said, "Is he very hot?"
I said, "Yes."
Is in Hindi he said, "He's an extremely hot
fellow."
He said, "All right, you get on the other
side," he made the foreign minister sit here.
You won't understand, just now you don't understand.
Even a little child who is a realized soul
will understand, but you won't because you're
not yet realized, this is the point.
The difference is you are mentally understanding.
I have a grand daughter she was hardly five
years of age when My daughter and the son-in-law
went to Ladakh, it's an interesting story.
And there was a lama sitting you see like
this, and everybody was touching his feet.
This little child was a realized soul, she
couldn't bear it any more, when the father
went and touched his foot she just stood back
and she said, "What do you mean by shaving
your head and wearing this big stuff you think
you are a realized soul?
Why are you making everybody touch your feet?"
Just she stood up.
And My son-in-law felt quite embarrassed and
he told that he's not even a realized soul
why do you touch his feet.
You won't understand, even a little child
will understand, you won't understand.
Realized soul is a person who can feel it.
This is what Buddha has said, that's the traditional
thing, he has said, "First of all seek yourself."
Buddha didn't talk about God.
Why, because he thought if you talk about
God again another religion will start.
He just said first of all, as I say, "First
of all seek yourself, get your Self-Realization.
Nothing else but get your Realization."
All right that's it.
So better have it, better have it.
You see you have Buddhism there's nothing
like "ism" about Buddha these people are mental.
To have it means to get Realization.
What tradition are they following, carrying
that ring like this, like that, mad kip (sic)
people, horrible.
Is that what Buddha did?
He sought His Realization.
He didn't do all these nonsensical things
these lamas.
And they even beat people and do all kinds
of things, horrible cruel people.
Thank God there out of that Lhasa.
You should see the Tibetans now they're sitting
on our heads like parasites in India and we
had a parliament question on them.
You see they look very attractive because
you are fed up with your Christianity, that's
what.
Don't believe in all these please whether
they're Hindus, Christians or Muslim, all
are just the same.
There's no difference.
You become the realized soul first of all.
You have to be the Buddha, all right, that's
what I am saying as a Mother.
And then they started another one Shambhala
business you see.
This is another new thing.
Taking everybody to Gobi Desert to get samadhi.
Walk in that Gobi Desert even one mile you'll
get a samadhi permanently.
[laughter] You can't even get a glass of water
there to drink, My child.
What things they are preaching, you don't
know, all nonsense.
In Spain some Spanish people have started
this nonsense.
They are recruiting people to go to Gobi Desert.
I mean what is going to happen to them?
Think of the Gobi Desert, is one of the worst
deserts of the world.
Can you imagine going to a desert, how will
you reach God?
You have to seek Him within yourself.
He's within, all right?
Question from seeker:- Mother please tell
us about the dangers of mis-using mantras
by religious sects.
Shri Mataji: Mantras, all right, dangers of
mantras?
You see mantra is a thing by which you awaken
the Deity within you.
The Deity, which is on this chakra.
Now here the chakras and we have deities.
On these we have to awaken the Deities.
So, a person who is awakened himself can only
tell you what mantra to be said, isn't it,
a simple thing as that?
The one who has no eyes, what can he tell
to another blind person?
So first an enlightened soul, who knows about
chakras can only tell you what chakras are
catching within you.
But the Kundalini should solve.
Supposing you are just now caught in your
Nabhi chakra and I tell you that you say the
mantra.
Not that you, but the realized soul should
say the mantra and awaken that.
Maybe the Kundalini has gone there, so from
there you have to come here.
You have to see the movement of the Kundalini.
Like a car is going now, very simple, the
car is going so we come to a toll gate, all
right.
There we have to pay the toll.
But where the car is going, and then there
is a toll gate you pay there to a particular
toll gate, isn't it?
Like when you are going you see -
(Shri Mataji speaks aside: I've given up tea.
I have, just given up.
Just take it.
Sixty years I thought I have drunk too much
of tea.
But that doesn't mean you should give up.
[laughter])
So you see the thing is the movement of the
Kundalini will only tell you which chakra
is catching, all right, otherwise you will
not know.
Unless until you move the car, before that,
how will you know where the car is going to
get the toll.
Can you pay it before the car starts?
So what happens, if they give you a mantra
mostly people don't know what they're doing.
You see it is a big enterprise.
Giving mantras is a very big enterprise.
Like they have given mantras, which I was
amazed to hear, if you tell some Indians,
they'll be laughing at you.
What they say is a great secret, and the mantras
they gave was, one was I heard, was "tinga"
means like this you show to someone you see
this is "tinga", in Hindi language.
There is nothing like "ing" in Sanskrit Language.
Another mantra I heard was "inga".
"Inga" means the tail of the, the sting of
a scorpion, can you imagine that could be
it.
And then, where is the director of the flying
squad, is he there?
He's hiding there at the back.
Now what is the mantra for they gave you for
flying?
What tubes?
Who is there?
Come along where is he?
Yogi: "Bronchial tubes, Mother."
Shri Mataji: Bronchial tubes.
Bronchial tubes, bronchial tubes, they paid
six thousand pounds for getting that mantra
for you.
[laughter] Just imagine this bronchial tube
is one of them.
Then they'll give a mantra of Rama.
Take a more sensible thing, they might give
a mantra of Rama.
But Rama where does He exist?
Supposing I want to give a mantra of Buddha,
for example.
Where is Buddha?
Are you catching on Buddha or not, is the
main point.
Where are you catching?
Where is Rama?
Rama resides in what part?
Is it necessary to give this mantra or not?
They don't know anything, no knowledge of
any kind just at random.
At the age of six years to twenty years give
the mantra what is it, "pinga" then another
one "tinga", another "ringa", according to
the age, not according to the Kundalin where
it is.
Now what is the danger of that, that's the
main point is.
That supposing they give you a name of Rama,
they are not awakened people they are not
connected with God, they are not authorized.
Now you go on saying Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama,
Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama like that, you see.
The other way round you say mara, mara means
I'm dead, I'm dead I'm dead.
So you go on saying a mantra Rama, Rama, Rama,
now what happens that you are not connected
with Rama at all, because you are not a realized
soul, neither the guru, the one who has taken
three thousand pounds for giving you this
Rama mantra, is a realized soul.
So when you are shouting like that Rama, Rama,
Rama, who will come to your help will be somebody
dead as Mr. Rama somewhere.
He will come to your help and he'll possess
you.
With that you may start thinking because you
get an added personality and suddenly you
feel you see you get more powers so called.
Like Gauguin if you go on saying Gauguin,
Gauguin, Gauguin he might enter into you.
You might start painting something and after
that finished you have no energy left because
one horse is riding two men.
But the worse thing that happens to you by
saying mantra is that you develop a terrible
dent in this very important center called
Vishuddhi, specially the left Vishuddhi.
And then they are frightened.
If you ask them, "What is your mantra?"
"Mother I won't tell you."
"Why?"
"No that is not to be told."
All secrets in God's vision, in God's realm
there should be no secret at all, everything
should be known, everybody should know what
is what.
Why should there be any secrets, I can't understand.
For example everybody will know those who
are realized souls, where you are catching,
what is your chakra, they'll tell you.
Everybody will say the same.
Like one day one gentleman came he said, "Why
are they all coming and asking me 'How is
your father?'"
I said, "Because your Rama's chakra is catching."
That's exactly the mantra you will take.
So your chakra is caught, that is the one
that the name they give you because you're
insulting the deity and this Vishuddhi chakra,
by which you say also is caught up, and from
there it goes as guilt to the left.
If you should try to correct a person it acts
as a guilt and he gets a problem on the left
hand side Vishuddhi which is a very, very
big problem.
Seeker: Japanese religious sect gives Buddhist
mantra called Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.
Shri Mataji: Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, I know.
You see Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a great thing,
but not by these Japanese people.
Japanese less said the better.
I met the person called, his name I have forgotten.
He was the head of the Zen system.
Now see Zen is Sahaja Yoga.
To be realized is to be Zen.
But this fellow had a frozen Kundalini just
like that there just sitting settled down.
So I told him, "Sir with very humble understanding
I would like to say, that are you really a
Zen?"
He said, "I'm teaching Zen, but I'm not."
I said, "Why?"
He said, "Altogether from the sixth century
till today, only up to the eight century we
had Prashapas [MAYBE Prashapas or Pashyapas
or Kashyapas - SG] means realized souls."
Only till the eighth century and after that
what followed was this kind of people who
had the Kundalini just settled down there.
But at least he was honest.
And he was suffering from a horrible disease
for which he came to Me.
So I said, "At least you do not propagate
now Zen, because you are not a Zen."
You are a Christian, are you?
Ask anyone who is he.
This artificial baptism is not Christianity.
Is the real baptism, raising of the Kundalini.
Is the Kundalini piercing through?
Are you a muslim?
You are not because you are not a pir, you
are to be a realized soul first.
So imagine all these people who are teaching
all these things are not authorized at all.
But they'll come round, I'm sure.
Seeker asks a question: I was interested in
Your comment when You said Nam-myoho-renge-kyo
is fine but not any Japanese...
Shri Mataji: You see now I'll tell you.
It is very simple to understand, you understand
one point which you are missing all the time.
Is this that supposing there is a constable
standing there and he says, "Go this way,"
all right, we have to obey him otherwise you'll
end in jail he's authorized, isn't it?
But supposing I go and stand there and say,
"Go this way," they'll put Me in jail.
They have no authority from God to do it because
they are not realized souls.
The same mantra becomes a great mantra when
it comes from an authorized person from God.
But the same mantra becomes a sinful thing
when it comes from a person who is not authorized,
who's just commercialized it.
[Seeker interrupts] Is it gone into your head
what I told you, that you are to be authorized
by God?
That is you should be self-realized.
If you are not self-realized you have no right
to give any mantras or anything, do you follow
this point, simple point.
Seeker: Sure.
Shri Mataji: Now that's all.
So you get your Realization, that's important,
which you should.
But I don't know how it works out, you see
that is not My guarantee.
If it works out well and good, may not work
out today.
So better put attention to that, it's important.
May God Bless you.
Is there any other question now?
Put attention to that, that is important.
But one thing more, when you follow them you
never ask questions.
I had one lady from a lama she came down from
Norway, she was horrid, absolutely horrid.
Her vibrations were, what was her name Gavin?
Gavin: Pia
Shri Mataji: Pia.
She came to My house I said, "Baba!
How to raise her Kundalini, baba, dreadful."
And she was thinking no end of herself and
arguing, arguing with Me throughout, and all
that.
I said, "How did you happen," I mean she has
been to this lama.
I said, "What happened?"
She said, "No, he wrote to us that I can't
live in an ordinary house you have to make
a marble floor.
So first we all starved ourselves, within
one year we collected money made a marble
floor for the fellow.
So he came and was sitting on the seventh
step and we were first one year we had to
just go and bow to him just like this."
One thousand and one time can you imagine
everyday and "I've done that course."
But I said, "Didn't you argue with him?"
She said, "No."
Then I said, "Why are you arguing with Me?"
Of course I like that you argue because that
shows you are free to argue, I've not mesmerized
you, but must see the sense.
How do we accept Buddha, let's see.
Have you seen Buddha?
Have you met him?
Have you met anybody who is a Buddhist who
says he can give Realization?
But then why are we the pleaders of Buddha
whom we have never seen, who has gone away,
we don't know anything about Him.
Why?
Because I am living He is not.
When He was living there were people who were
asking about other people.
So better be in the present and get it your
Realization, all right, that's what it is.
That's what happened with Buddha he couldn't
give Realization to anyone whatsoever.
Sariputa, Mogallana, all were wasted people.
Same with Christ.
Because when Krishna came they said, "What
about Rama?"
When Rama came they said, "What about Dattatreya?"
But where is Dattatreya now?
Rama is standing here why not get it from
Him.
So everybody failed.
They said, "They are talking about the past
only."
What about the present?
You are sitting before Me, I am sitting before
you, have your Realization.
Why argue about it?
If there's a diamond and if I say you can
have it free will you argue?
You understand diamond better than our Spirit.
Always we did that but this time better not
miss it.
I'm telling you better have your Realization,
it's important.
Of course Buddha plays a very big role within
us but first get your Spirit otherwise it
has no authority.
The knowledge of Buddha has no authority within
you unless and until you become the Buddha
yourself.
All right, now let's have it.
At the end of it I would request you to have
your Realization.
Put your hands like this towards Me just like
this.
Better now, relaxed, all right, nice.
Put your hands like this.
It works, it works that's the point is, it
should work, isn't it?
Now close your eyes, please.
Just close your eyes, you have to keep your
eyes shut that's important because when the
Kundalini rises above the Agnya chakra if
your eyes are not closed it will fall down,
so please close your eyes.
There's no mesmerism that's why you have to
close your eyes.
Just keep your eyes shut.
[Shri Mataji speaks aside: Take the baby out,
please.]
Just sit comfortably don't move, don't make
any gestures nothing, nothing outward.
You have to be inside, it will work out inside.
Nothing should work out outside.
Just keep quiet.
Just put your hand towards Me.
Whatever has to work out will work out inside,
not outside.
Don't open your eyes but don't fix your attention
anywhere, keep it loose, just keep it loose,
don't fix it at a point, please.
Don't try to fix it at - some people are fixing
it at the point what we call the Agnya chakra
or anything.
At the most you can put your attention on
top of your head.
But don't try to fix it anywhere keep it loose,
absolutely loose.
Now with your right hand, which is the hand
of your creativity or the action power, you
have to use the right hand to express your
action and the left hand is a desire.
So you have to put the left hand towards Me
for the desire but don't open your eyes, just
on the lap you can keep it comfortably as
it is and you have to just move your right
hand but keep the fingers straight.
Straight fingers toward Me and move the right
hand as I tell you.
No, on the lap left hand on the lap and the
right hand I'll tell you how to move it.
Now put the right hand, no left hand toward
Me.
Sahaja Yogis should see left hand towards
Me now move the right hand.
Left hand on your lap comfortably, please
put left hand on your lap.
Left hand on your lap, yes very comfortably.
Now the right hand you have to put it on your
heart.
Heart where resides your Spirit.
Now in your heart you have to ask a question
to Me, "Mother am I the Spirit?"
Just put it on the right hand side.
Those who are very much on the left but actually
it is on the left hand side is the heart.
You see those who are putting it too much
toward the left should put it at the proper
place of your heart is on the left hand side.
Now press it with your fingers.
And just ask a question, "Mother am I the
spirit?"
Say it thrice, ask a question with full confidence.
Now please put this right hand, don't open
your eyes, on your stomach on the left hand
side again.
Lower part of the stomach and push it and
ask the question again to Me, "Mother am I
my own Master, am I my own Guru?"
Because you are, and this Spirit is your Guru.
But when you are asking Me a question, "Mother
am I the Spirit?" you have to ask the second
question, "Mother am I my own Guru, am I my
own Spirit?"
Because the Spirit is the Guru, which is awakened
within you, when you get your Realization.
So you have to say, "Mother am I my own Guru?"
Say it ten times.
Ask the question ten times.
The times are according to the chakras.
Keep the left hand the same way and now put
again the right hand on the heart.
And now you assert with confidence that, "Mother
I am the Spirit," which you are.
This you have to do it twelve times, twelve
times.
Ten plus two, twelve times you have to say,
"Mother I am the Spirit."
With confidence, with full confidence you
should say, "Mother I am the Spirit," full
confidence.
Now take this right hand across to the left
side of your neck, left side of your neck.
Again was I said left Vishuddhi.
Because the Spirit is immaculate, absolute,
it never does any mistakes so there is no
question of feeling guilty.
So you have to say sixteen times now that,
"Mother I am not guilty."
Say it sixteen times, again with full confidence,
because we're talking about God Almighty who
is the ocean of love, ocean of forgiveness,
ocean of compassion, sixteen times.
Now again raise the left hand without opening
your eyes, to your forehead.
Across your forehead, across your forehead,
and hold your forehead in your hand, right
hand, left hand being towards Me.
At this point is the Agnya chakra where you
have to say that, "Mother I forgive everyone."
Now some of you might say that I cannot forgive
is a very common thing people tell Me.
But when you don't forgive what you are doing
is to play into the hands of people who try
to harm you.
So you just say, "Mother I forgive everyone."
With full understanding, without any reservation,
"I forgive everyone."
Unless and until you forgive everyone how
can God forgive you?
So let God forgive you for your mistakes what
you have done in your ignorance but don't
feel guilty about it.
Only you just say, "Mother I forgive everyone."
Now put this hand on top of your head, right
hand again where the soft bone was there when
you were a child.
Press it with your palm that portion and move
it in a clockwise manner.
Press that palm and move it in a clockwise
manner.
Now at this point I cannot cross your freedom.
It's your freedom, which I respect, you have
to say that you want realization.
So, here you have to say, "Mother we want
our realization.
Please give us the Realization," otherwise
I cannot cross.
So please say this seven times.
Now you can raise your hand and see if there
is a cool breeze coming.
Some people might be getting the heat coming
out of their heads.
Raise it higher to see if there is a cool
breeze coming out.
So many of you are still feeling guilty, is
a wrong thing.
I've told you not to feel guilty.
Just see if there is a cool breeze coming
out.
Now you can take another hand, left hand and
see with your left hand.
You can change over and see if there is a
cool breeze coming out.
Not very much higher say about four inches
higher.
You can change over another hand.
You just see if this gentleman has got it,
Ruth see his.
You got it, you feeling in the hand also,
not in the hand.
He's got in the hand, you got it, it's very
subtle.
It's a subtle thing.
You are coming from a gross level to a subtler
place.
All right, you have to do that left to the
right.
Put your hands toward Me still, see the Sahaja
Yogis will help you now.
Once you become Sahaja Yogis you have to help
others, all right.
They know about your chakras.
Is he all right?
All right try to help Matha?
See this gentleman, no.
Left to the right, put him left to the right.
Is he all right, all right?
Not yet in the hand.
You just watch Me without thinking.
Can you do it?
Got it, got it she said she's a Sahaja Yogini.
What about him?
Got it, see there.
(Shri Mataji speaks to someone in Marathi)
See the new people please.
No, no don't stop yet put (inaudible.)
Put it left to the right.
(Shri Mataji speaks to someone in Marathi)
Vishuddi , Nabhi (Shri Mataji speaks to someone
in Marathi).